i don't know what it takes to get people
to change
um
one of the most powerful and most
compelling and most common sources of
change is that someone recognizes that
they've done wrong
what i find
so terrifying about the current
generation
who've grown up playing video games
is that when they engage in this
behavior the casual cruelty
of the internet
there's no awareness whatsoever that
they've done anything wrong
so i was suggesting to you before
someone like joe best
someone like vegan foot soldier
they would do these things and then when
i'd talk to them because they're all
people i communicated with at length in
some cases for years
they would really sincerely not perceive
themselves as having done something
wrong another great example is ask
yourself
ask i remember talking conflicts through
with asia and he just didn't get it
now how many hours have these people
spent
dealing with conflicts face to face with
real people in their whole lives and how
many hours have they spent on the
internet in video game chat forums like
chat that's built in the videos through
all those digital forms of communication
yes i do think the problem even if it
doesn't originate in video games it
doesn't originate in internet culture
it's exacerbated by internet culture and
it's creating a whole generation of
people who have
stereotypically autistic behaviors
without actually having the medically
real condition of autism it's
cultivating a whole generation of people
who are not just stupid and ignorant but
self-righteously
stupid and ignorant and who bring to
these discussions and attitude that
cannot be overcome with kindness which
as i said for many years was really my
inclination there's another youtuber who
is known for almost nothing other than
criticizing my channel or insulting my
channel or def defaming me personally
the channel is called fandar he has
several separate channels one of them is
nothing but 100
hate videos
uh directed towards me
you guys might not guess this but i can
provide evidence
for
four years
i made positive efforts
intermittently to reach out to this guy
and talk to him about his concerns and
overcome
i really made efforts again and again
not constantly
would have taken up all my time but
intermittently to overcome
his hostility with
kindness
you know
and
it failed
it failed every time
because he i think he is typical of of
his generation and my generation also of
our generation a very broadly defined
generation the generation that's grown
up since the invention of the internet
he has
no concept
of kindness
he has no
concept of what it is to be charitable
he has no concept of what it is to be
reasonable especially not in the context
of a of a confrontation or or of a
conflict he genuinely doesn't know
what i'm saying so you can say it's
about vegan foot soldier i can say this
about
so many people i've interacted with or
they did it like if you actually talk to
them long enough they can't
change it's not that they can't admit
that they've done something wrong they
genuinely cannot perceive themselves as
having done something wrong so you know
i write to this guy i say look i've
shown you a lot of kindness i've shown
you a lot of consideration i've taken a
lot of my time to address your concerns
even though many of them are
unreasonable some of them are insane
some of them are based on your own like
delusions or hallucinations like you
think i've said things i haven't said
you made things up about me and you
don't realize you made them up or
misrepresentations or lies in a couple
cases he took a lie someone else made
and then he ran with it without even
googling or whatever you know it's like
okay so you have all this i was still
against me but you know
one of the things i said to him is you
know look
even if you think
your harassment and defamation
of me is justified which is not
why have you been doing this to melissa
for four years
what did she do wrong
all she did was fall in love with me
and you've made her life hell
and you know i may be tough but
melissa's not that tough like you must
know this hurts her more than it hurts
me and you have engaged in this
self-righteous you know vicious and
vitriolic
campaign to ruin our lives
you know
this guy he's not the first
he made up the allegation out of thin
air that i was a pedophile
no evidence no google's no concern and
he made a series of videos claiming and
advancing this to my knowledge some of
them were deleted by google
i don't know exactly what happened the
flagging system
and to my knowledge now just after my
talking in the last
two days
where i made this effort to be
reasonable i've reasoned it through with
him
he's deleted the remaining copies of
those videos wherever you re-uploaded
them or what have you what i'm really
trying to describe here is different
from what's commonly called the
conspiracy theory mentality these are
individual people
sitting at their keyboards fastening
onto little snippets of information
that will justify
their own malice that will give them a
pretext or an excuse to carry on a
defamation and harassment campaign
against you the example i'm going to
give you now
it's typical it's not extraordinary it's
stupid to me it's mind-blowingly stupid
but i've got to tell you what the
internet has taught me is that the vast
majority
of our fellow human beings they think
and feel and act this way and they use
their minds in large part to justify
totally irrational agendas and
apprehensions in december of 2019
i mentioned in passing
that esana o'neil is less attractive
today than she was at the height of her
fame when she was offered modeling
contracts and made a lot of money by
appearing in advertisements that this is
an unremarkable thing to say and as it
happens i was saying it in the midst of
quite a meaningful video where i was
talking about the meaning of life
talking about the fact that whether
you're a young lady or a young gentleman
your looks are not going to last and you
really should care about building
yourself up intellectually and doing
meaningful things with your life
those things are still going to matter
when you're 65. so it wasn't for no
reason that i was commenting on her
appearance in passing this guy fandar
fastened onto
the fact that i had said in passing that
this woman is less attractive than she
was in the past and he used that as
justification to carry out a defamation
campaign against me claiming that i must
be a pedophile because in his mind
logically the only way
someone could have this observation the
only reason i could have the only
possible motivation i could have for
making that statement in that context
wasn't to illustrate the argument of the
video it wasn't it wasn't part of a
point i was clearly an explicit no no no
this was proof positive
of some hidden dark urge i have beneath
the surface he's doing the same thing
right now
in ringing his hands trying to come up
with crazy paradoxical conspiratorial
explanations for how it is that i've
come to the conclusion that jasmine
gaines is really quite unattractive
she's also quite overweight at the
moment
um may or may not matter depending on
what angle you're criticizing vegan
gains from because vegan gains has a
long history of fat shaming other people
on the internet he has a long history of
denouncing women for being overweight on
the internet specifically she hates her
body she hates the way she looks and
she's ashamed of herself for becoming so
fat there's a reason why 99 of people
find those who are overweight and obese
unattractive it's because it's [ __ ]
unhealthy we are biologically wired to
seek out healthy people who are capable
of producing viable offspring it's not
possible for him to hear what i've got
to say
about vegan gains and jasmine gaines and
s and o'neill and receive it in a
fundamentally charitable way like hey
this guy is making a point that's
important to him he's offering some kind
of criticism whether it's of the vegan
movement or the culture of living in a
culture where all that anyone cares
about is your physical appearance and
beauty and he's seen this in passing for
that purpose no there must be some dark
hidden ulterior motive even if he is
struggling at this moment to come up
with it there must be some way he can
manufacture this into an attack on your
character just because i have a great
this is a great example of this so this
is with fandar but it's closely parallel
to what i dealt with with other vegan
activists and so on and look sorry i
haven't used the term vegan activist in
this whole video right but that was the
other thing it's like
if we wanted to get rich we'd all be
working in real estate if we wanted to
get famous we'd all be working in
hollywood guys i came on youtube to try
to make the world a better place why is
that nobody else has good intentions why
is nobody else even charitable like you
know i'm willing to reciprocate good
attention why is nobody else even
willing to be reasonable how can it be
this hostile this terrible this
conspiratorial you know uh so on and so
forth um
you know
i've made videos talking about my
divorce
i've made videos talking about my agony
in being separated from my daughter and
lengthy legal process of trying to spend
more time with my daughter and
how the french court system okay so i
got negative things to say about my
ex-wife
plenty of divorced people do it's not
really that big a deal
all right but this guy fandar
he constructed a theory in his mind
that i had some ulterior motives that i
was part of some shadowy conspiracy to
manipulate the outcome of my own court
case because i'm such a terrible person
because i made one video
talking positively about what a
wonderful person my ex-wife was and why
i fell in love with her
so i did something positive you guys can
imagine what i mean
see this is the thing i'm saying you
guys can imagine i imagine a reasonable
rational person who sees that and thinks
well this guy has made he has no choice
in a sense he's made a bunch of videos
talking about how tough his situation is
with his divorce and one court case
after another and one lawyer after
another and he wanted to take the time
to make a separate video where he's not
talking about in that stuff when instead
he talks in a positive way about how we
fell in love with this woman or what you
mean or what are redeeming quotas or
what the positive side
to me the intentions involved are self
evident what motivated me to make this
video but in the same way that these
idiots will watch a video of you filming
yourself in a walmart in china and we'll
interpret that as proof that you're
secretly working for the cia and you've
never been in china never gone to china
at all and you don't really speak
chinese
people will take that
as evidence of the exact opposite 180
degrees and
and again my problem my problem is not
that this person is insane pardon me my
problem is not that this person is
insane my problem is not this person is
artistic the problem is not this person
is ordinary i think this is ordinary i
think this is the result of our video
game culture so this is what i wrote
defender i'm doing this from memory but
i could read it to you verbatim you know
what i mean
i wrote back to him again see i'm
showing him kindness when he has shown
me
none
i'm showing him how reasonable i can be
with the expectation that he will be
reasonable in return that he will ask
questions and provide answers in a way
that's charitable and that's how you
build up trust that's a human being's
work and if you don't have that if i'm
reasonable with someone and they can't
be reasonable with me back then everyone
has to resort to brute force we're all
back to being animals because it's
reasonableness it's reasoning that
separates us from animals it separates
us from just solving things
through coercion of one kind or another
right so you know okay i'm gonna take
the time out and answer this
unreasonable question as if it were
reasonable you made no effort to make
this and it's just throwing in my face
that somehow there's some terrible dark
motive
or agenda behind this i say no you know
what
i made that video
because i'm a nice guy
if there were nothing positive to say
about my ex-wife
i never would have married her
conversely
if there were nothing negative to say
about my ex-wife
i never would have divorced her
life is complicated you know
i can make a video
just telling you positive things about
buddhism and you guys might not know
this there is a video like that on my
channel there's a video as i recall it's
about an hour long that was just talking
about my positive experiences as a
scholar of buddhism and the ways in
which that was a wonderful time in my
life
and i have made many many videos talking
about telling you about warning you
about the ways in which buddhism is a
terrible religion you know particular
scams particular sources of corruption
particular sources of danger but also
talking about the philosophy talking
about talking about the history talking
about the political reality of buddhism
right so look guys
if there were nothing positive to say
about buddhism i wouldn't have devoted
years of my life to searching it you
know what i mean i wouldn't have studied
these languages i wouldn't have moved to
these countries right and if there were
nothing negative to say about buddhism
right
so now to me again the most fundamental
problem here
is stupidity all right
i
cannot imagine being stupid enough
that i watch those two videos or watch
five videos even and say oh well in this
video you say that everything about
buddhism is bad and evil and wrong but
then in this other video you said good
things about buddhism so why did you do
that i've got a theory i've got an
explanation it's secretly because this
because you're motivated by that for
this
completely unsubstantiated
set of reasons
i have i have one video where i talk
about what i like about star wars
and i have several videos talking about
how terrible star wars is it's not a
contradiction there are some good things
about star wars and there are some bad
things about star wars like i can say
honestly there's even a sense in which i
could see like the first star wars movie
is a little bit of an inspiration to me
it's not a major inspiration but you
know sure okay you look at that you
think
okay maybe i can do something creative
in filmmaking or in writing a book or in
fiction that changes the world in that
way the way the first star wars movie
did you know
i i cannot imagine
being so stupid
that you look at somebody's youtube
video where he has youtube videos and
like a lot of them were just sad it's me
sitting there saying look you know this
is the reality of my situation with my
daughter and my divorce and my lawyers
and this is it then the other hand they
make a video saying you know look you
know i don't want you guys in the
audience to only have a negative
impression of my ex-wife i don't want
you to only have an impression that that
time in my life like the years that we
were together was was terrible there
were good things about it also if there
were no good things about it like either
i would have never married her would
have never
you know fallen in love with her or
i would have left her much sooner it
doesn't take that much of a charitable
attitude this is the meaning of
charitable english it doesn't mean you
assume i'm an angel doesn't mean you
assume unwonderful you have a charitable
attitude in looking at that evidence and
turning that way okay
so you guys get the point i took the
time
to write back to this guy positively
when he's he has carried on a harassment
and defamation campaign against me on
the internet for years
okay he has claimed that i was a
pedophile he has said worse things but
he has made up all of these you know
unforgivable lies all this definition
also harassment and he sent messages to
my girlfriend
he's repeating
it's not worth summarizing the level of
insult harassment defamation and threats
too we also had threats that's why we
went to the police i was like well okay
this crosses the line into harassment
legally because he's making threats
against me right
so you know you know can we can we end
these years of harassment by going to
the police there's an educational
experience you'll learn you'll learn how
that part of the legal process works uh
in canada you know what i mean
how do you think how do you think you
reacted to this like fundamentally warm
and generous and giving thing of saying
like
no look you know
like there's no conspiracy
i also explained a little bit more about
the legal circumstances like no there's
no way that youtube video could have
impacted my legal situation at that time
at that time it was interesting you guys
didn't even know i had legally been
declared dead in france i was missing in
action and the actual legal legal
paperwork basically they interpreted my
situation as if i had committed suicide
i had disappeared with a trace and was
like presumed dead as if i committed
suicide right
yeah you know what if the courts in
france
were willing to consider youtube videos
as evidence they could have just put my
name into google and seen that i was
uploading youtube videos once every
couple of days and that i was alive and
well it was like
no
no the youtube video all of them
collectively with everything no that was
not me trying to manipulate the court
system no there wasn't a conspiracy no
it wasn't else no that was me
being a nice guy
he responds to that by writing back and
saying oh well i can quote a youtube
video where you say that you're not a
nice guy
[Music]
i cannot imagine
being that stupid nobody told me nobody
wore me my parents didn't warn me the
church didn't warn me my school teachers
didn't warn me nobody warned me that
there were people so stupid that i get
to look at that like well you made one
video saying that you know your ex-wife
is a bad person but you made another
video saying she's gonna pursue my
speech
some of the messages this guy sent to
melissa appeared as screenshots in
melissa's videos
and this guy is writing back to me and
he really sincerely
cannot perceive himself as having done
anything wrong
he is unable to discern what he he's
asking me questions
i've now known this guy for four years
okay you might think this is an act and
i've known all this i've known asked
yourself for so many years i've seen
vegan foot soldier for so many years
these are all people i have years of
dialogue with
and he really actually cannot perceive
himself as being cruel
i think in large part because he has no
counterposing notion of what it is to be
kind no counterposing notion of
generosity of spirit of what it is to
have charitable assumptions about
someone whether you're engaged in
dialogue with them or whether you're
evaluating their youtube videos so
there's a totally reasonable uh comment
here it could apply to several people
verplex says i'm pretty sure that guy
isn't mentally sound
my concern is that he might be more
normal than we want to admit to
ourselves right
so this guy constructs
all kinds of theories in his own
mind so he constructed there and again
all that anyone seems to need to
reinforce their delusions is will some
people say on the internet oh well i'm
not the only person saying it you know
like
okay
so
you know i've been together with melissa
for
four and a half years
roughly
okay melissa has made statements
that she loves me
that she's so happy with me that this
relationship is the best thing that ever
happened to in her life again and again
and again on youtube
on instagram
you know
you've seen us joking around and talking
about it like if you actually watch my
videos i don't want to add up how many
hours in total right so there's some
sense in which you've you know
there's a lot of evidence of what this
relationship is and how it's gone right
the good and the bad of it all right
and this is the problem fandaar isn't
the only one he's not the only one and
actually now that i think about it also
vegan foot soldier did this right there
are people who are willing to go through
that with a fine-tooth comb and try to
find one moment where there's a
quote-unquote red flag and they will
then construct an elaborate theory that
all of this evidence no matter how
honest we are no matter how generous no
matter how forthcoming no matter how
reasonable that all of this is a fraud
that this is an elaborate fraud
concealing what's really going on and
that there are ulterior motives involved
you know no evidence
and they get themselves set into a uh
a self-justifying
cyclical mentality
it would be the easiest thing in the
world for me to say to you
i regret taking the time to talk to
these people i don't
you know
like if i hadn't taken the time to talk
to these people i wouldn't believe it
was real
like it does not seem
humanly possible to me to be this stupid
you know what i mean it does not seem
humanly possible to me to be so
mean-spirited and have such
negative motivations and to be unaware
of them and to be unaware of the extent
to which those motivations are warping
your view of reality you know what i
mean
but obviously this is how the majority
of human beings live their lives the
majority of the time creative renewal
says i'm sorry but i see these takedown
crews against creators on almost every
uh niche in the platform so creative
renewal thanks for thanks for the
comment
um
[Music]
so my question is what happens next
i don't disagree with you
so what happens next
you know like so where are we all going
to be 10 years from now 20 years you
know
how is this going to change us as
individuals and you scale it up how is
it going to change the culture because
i'm telling you it changed me
i didn't think i was naive i didn't
think i was jejune
i used to hang out with illiterate rice
farmers in cambodia and laos and
thailand you know what i mean i've hung
out with people at a very low level of
formal education i never thought they
were this stupid you know i would never
say that you become wise through
gambling i would never say that you
become more intelligent through drinking
beer with a bunch of 60 year old men i
would never say that
but you know the other thing that's so
striking to me about the new generation
coming up the next generation the
current generation even people my own
age even
they have had so little experience of
human nature face to face like they've
had so little experience of what real
couples go through like in their own
lives like they've had very limited
experience in terms of their sex life a
lot of them
just in reality they've had very few
partners they can't talk the way i do
but they also don't have trusting
relationships with like close friends
who told them about what going through
their divorce was like they haven't seen
people going through they don't talk to
people again talking to people in their
60s is the best way to do it people
who've really lived through a lot of
stuff they don't have a sense of what
authentic human nature and experience is
like and that's why it's so easy for
them to slip into this kind of
conspiratorial mindset about the
simplest thing imaginable whether it's
going to walmart or talking
a girlfriend talking about how much she
loves her boyfriend like melissa is
saying how much she loves me like oh
this must all be a smoke screen no
you know like you know or a guy who
makes a video saying hey you know what
my ex-wife actually in a lot of ways she
was a wonderful human being she had i
want to take some time out to say
positive things about my
side of the relationship and it is in
because they have so little of that
face-to-face experience with human
nature and again i'm not in favor of
gambling i'm not in favor of drinking
beer i'm not in favor of going to prison
but you know i think people who spent a
lot of time doing any of those things
gambling drinking going to prison
their experience with human nature in
that sense would prepare them much more
to deal with and to scrutinize what it
is we're looking at you know here on
youtube so yeah creative renewal says so
melissa also said this is critic
renewal says exactly it's so sad it
could be such an amazing tool for us all
i feel that and like even if it's just
doing book reviews creative renewal even
if it's just you coming on and talking
about something you learned this week
because you read a book it's so
wonderful and we never answered
yeah
you know even if it's just well look
whether it's sharing your own suffering
and sorrow like talking about your
divorce that's so wonderful or it's
coming on to share a book report it's so
great to be able to share your your life
with other people in this way and it's
so sad that
we're all being intimidated out of doing
it by small numbers of of crazy people
again i can't even say that it's not
small numbers it's the vast majority of
people who grew up playing video games
and the realest thing they know is like
twitter and instagram they think oh yeah
this is a video game and then this is
instagram and twitter this is real life
you know they they haven't been through
those those real situations and let's
face it guys a lot of jobs today
because the workplace is also highly
mechanized the computers they may have a
normal job they go to but at their job
they sit at a computer you know like
this
even if you work in a factory you're at
a factory but you're a computer terminal
you mostly work with a machine and like
the extent to which the workplace no
longer involves in-depth trusting
uh human interactions right so it goes
way be the
this way the mechanization of our
society the computerization of our
society it goes far beyond
the the living room couch it goes far
beyond the the mirror playing on video
games what these people are used to is
communicating on reddit or communicating
on facebook
they're just used to saying the cruelest
thing they can they don't even perceive
it as cruel anymore
and they're not used to face-to-face
relationships with with real people
would you say that to your boss at
starbucks will you say that to your boss
at the office like where do you think
this relationship is gonna go if you
treat people that way there's no way to
make progress there's no way to uh
there's no way to get someone else to be
reasonable in return there's no way to
get the person to recognize that they're
in the wrong
and that they don't change because they
can't perceive themselves as having done
anything wrong
so yeah i'm making a pretty grandiose
claim here that the internet has
actually really fundamentally changed
our sense of right and wrong
i hadn't thought of that this video
but
you know i guess that's true in a very
simple sense if that's what you're used
to is that kind of
dialogue
really a sort of staccato monologue
of the youtube comment section or
whatever it is on the internet
um
whether it's 4chan or otherwise and
4chan is a good example or what have you
um when you perceive that as normal
that's going to profoundly shape or
distort your your perception of
of right and wrong question i i really
think it is not overstating the problem
to say that people have lost
touch with the most important aspect of
their humanity all right so i've said
this before but i said this maybe five
years ago on the channel okay
i don't care who you treat your friends
how do you treat your worst enemies
how do you treat the people you disagree
with you know if you really think i've
done something wrong
because of what i said about the vegan
movement or because of what i said about
nina and iran or something okay
how do you treat me all right because i
know my own standards of integrity i've
criticized a natural vegan i have never
called a natural vegan a pedophile i
have never said anything dishonest or
i have never violated my own sense of
personal integrity about a natural vegan
in any way whatsoever neither joking nor
deadpan serious i stand by every word of
it guess what that's a conflict about a
really really serious issue okay
unnatural vegan uses uh mind-altering
drugs that cause brain damage she
continued using mind-altering drugs that
cause brain damage during her pregnancy
it harms her it also harms the unborn
infant and you know what i think she
knows it i mean just her tone of voice
in the video where she admitted that you
know kind of
and i'm continuing to use this
medication
it's just my feeling i'd already made
videos talking about that and blah blah
okay that's big issue to me okay that's
that's something worth
fighting over in in a sense that's
that's really worth
you know disputing you know how do you
treat your your closest friends most
these people have no friends i mean this
is a this is one problem but you know
how do you treat your enemies how do you
treat the people you disagree with how
do you treat the people you know you
despise
um
i think that's something our school
teachers didn't ever
can you remember ever going to school
and hearing anything about that can you
remember your parents talking about that
i can't even remember tv shows or
certainly the church doesn't
doesn't deal with it you know so on and
so forth creative renewal says it's
really upsetting when i see how people
squander this tool and abuse creators
trust when they do open up
it's a mob mentality well right so
fandor is writing to me now
yesterday and today
in the context of melissa
having made a video spontaneously and
sincerely that partly responds to
fandaar partly responds to a bunch of
other people
where she's really saying that she's
committed to keeping it real and that
what we said in the earlier videos about
our relationship it's really real guys
you know what i mean what we say now is
really real also
you know
and then someone like him responds that
i know just i've just seen it by just
digging in deeper to that conspiratorial
blaming mentality it's not possible for
them to have generosity of spirit
because they have no concept of
generosity of spirit it's not possible
for them to be charitable
you